
Lab1 Answers

1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each of the two scheduling policies? Also, give the advantages and disadvantages of the round robin scheduling policy originally implemented in Xinu.
Answer:

1. Policy name: Exponential Distribution scheduler:

Advantages: 
This policy is based on random selection of the process to be run. That is helpful to ensure a level of fairness (but not completely fair) for process scheduling.
This would always ensure progress since the process selection is random. So on an average the starvation will not happen.

Disadvantages:  
Since the process selection is based on exponential random number generation. It is highly dependent on value of lambda that we choose and how exponential distribution happens. It therefore affects how the value gets generated. Since the exponential random values generated are more concentrated towards the lower values closer to 0. We can’t say the scheduler is completely fair
So, the processes with lower priority values have higher probability of getting scheduled than the ones in higher priority.
 This policy involves computation for exponential number generation which is an overhead
 
2. Policy name: Linux Like scheduler:

Advantages:
Linux like scheduler is unbiased in execution and ensures that each process is assigned a time quantum for which it can run. It is also fair to the processes that could not use their time quantum since it allocates some percentage of aggregated time quantum to them in subsequent epochs.
It ensures that no process starves for execution if it is runnable.

Disadvantages:
Though the scheduler is fair to the processes in the current epoch, it does not acknowledge the value or we can say, the very existence of new processes being created in the current epoch. It is not a good approach if we assume high priority processes can get created during the epoch that need to be addressed immediately.
This policy involves two additional computation steps (for epoch initialization and goodness factor setting) which is an overhead.



3. Policy name:  Original Round robin scheduling policy:

Advantages:
It ensures fairness in scheduling with equal time time quantum for all the processes (provided priority of runnable processes are similar). So average waiting time and response time for each process decreases.
Also the implementation is quite straight-forward with least computation for process selection. 
Disadvantages: 
The process still cannot ensure no starvation in the scenario where a high priority process gets scheduled repeatedly since the process selection is based on priority values and there is no epoch kind of approach.




2. Describe the way each of the schedulers affects the NULL process. 
Answer:

1. Exponential Scheduler:
Exponential scheduler is picking the processes at random from the ready queue. Once the exponential scheduler is in action, null process will get scheduled only if there are no processes left in the ready queue or the exponential values generated is zero (with null process in the ready queue)

2. Linux Like Scheduler:
Linux like scheduler picks the process based on goodness value. Null process gets a goodness of zero (and also time quantum of zero ) and hence it will not be executed until other runnable processes are done executing. Once all the runnable processes are finished, it will execute.

3. Default Round Robin:
Since the default scheduler picks the processes based on priority and null process has priority zero, so it will execute the null process only if there are no more runnable processes

